IPLD URL Scheme v0
==================

This is a proposed IPLD URL scheme spec, focusing on a minimal viable specification which doesn't address advanced use cases such as lenses or selectors.

**Author**: Mauve Signeaver ([@RangerMauve])

---

tl;dr

```
GET ipld://bafy....etc/some/path => {some: data}
PUT ipld://bafy....etc/some/path {some: data} => ipld://bafy...etc/
```

## Objective

`ipfs://` exists out in the wild to provide ways to link to files, and some web browsers integrate IPFS URLs to load and author content.
This spec shows how a similar URL scheme can exist for IPLD data.
Part of the goal of the spec is to make it easy to reuse more or less the same APIs between software that handles `ipld://` URLs natively, HTTP gateways like the [IPFS gateway](https://docs.ipfs.io/concepts/ipfs-gateway/) and CLIs.
With that in mind, there should be a clear mapping between HTTP-like APIs via gateways and URL handlers, and CLI arguments.
In order to make it easier to come to an initial spec, we will focus on a minimal set of features and make subsequent specs with support for features like ADLs, Schemas, and advanced selectors.

## Initial Functionality

The initial functionality focuses on being able to GET and PUT IPLD data to and from a URL.
For now, this will be done by encoding individual blocks of IPLD data using codecs with a default to the [DAG-JSON](https://ipld.io/specs/codecs/dag-json/spec/) codec.
Some initial support for pathing is also included for convenience.

### GET `ipld://{CID}/{Path} Headers {Accept="application/vnd.ipld.dag-json"} => Data`

The most basic mapping is to get some data from a CID.

The `CID` parameter in the URL MUST be in the CIDv1 format or any other format that is not case sensitive.
This is necessary since the URL scheme considers the `hostname` portion to be case-insensitive and many URL parsers (such as the one in Chrome) will automatically convert it to lowercase. 

`Data` is the response body which contaisn the encoded IPLD data for the given CID+Path.
Note that any `Link`s within the IPLD data will not be resolved, and you'll need to conver them to URLs and fetch additional data yourself, or add path segments to the URL to traverse into them.

The `Accept` header may be optionally provided to specify the codec that should be used in the response.
This follows the same conventions as in the [IPFS gateway](https://github.com/ipfs/go-ipfs/pull/8758).
Other codecs that may be targetted are DAG-CBOR.
We will need to choose either `application/vnd.ipld.dag-json` or just `application/json` as the dag-json mime type.

The `Path` can be used to specify segments separated by a `/` to use with basic traversal,
if it is supplied the IPLD Node at that location relative to the CID will be returned.
If there path does not lead to a valid IPLD node, an error will be returned instead, e.g. `HTTP 404`.

### PUT `ipld://{CID}/{path} Headers {Content-Type="application/vnd.ipld.dag-json"} Body={encoded IPLD data} => URL`

The `{CID}` should be the "base" CID to extend data from.
Sadly if we are to use URLs, we must have some sort of CID in the hostname.
One example would be to use `ipld://baeaaaapw/` which represents a `null` object that you could add data on top of.

Some other "identity" URLs include:
- `ipld://bafkqaaa/` => `Uint8Array([])`, an empty Buffer, DAG-JSON
- `ipld://baguqeaaclnoq/` => `[]`, an empty List, DAG-JSON
- `ipld://baguqeaacpn6q/` => `{}`, an empty Map, DAG-JSON
- `ipld://bafyqaama/` => `[]`, an empty List, DAG-CBOR
- `ipld://bafyqaana/` => `{}`, an empty Map, DAG-JSON

The `Body` of the request should contain the encoded IPLD data you wish to upload.

The `Content-Type` may be optionally provided to specify the encoding of the `Body`.
By default it will be assumed to be `DAG-JSON`.

If a `Path` is specified, intermediate Nodes will be created and added to the Node specified by the CID.
Note that nodes which do not already exist will be created as `Maps`.

`List` nodes in the tree will get special treatment.
You can append to a LIST by using `PUT ipld://SOME_CID/list/2/` where `2` is the index you wish to add data to in the list.
If the list size is smaller than the index, an error will be returned.
Similarly, if you try to use a non-integer key when adding to a list, e.g. `PUT ipld://SOME_CID/list/non_integer_name`, you will get an error since lists can only store integer keys.

The `Body` will be added as the last node in the tree.
If data already exists at intermediate nodes, it won't be touched other than the final part of the segment.

The response will contain an `ipld://` URL which can then be used with `GET` or subsequent `PUT`s.

## URL to Gateway conversion:

`ipld://` URLs can be converted to standard Gateway URLs by replacing the `ipld://` portion at the beginning with `http://localhost:8080/ipld/` and passing the rest of the request headers and body as is.
Note that gateways may have different root paths than `http://localhost:8080/ipld/`, e.g. `https://ipld.io/ipld/`.

E.g.: `ipld://{CID}/{Path}` => `http://localhost:8080/ipld/{CID}/{Path}`

## URL to CLI

There's no planned CLI for this functionality yet, but a request to a URL might translate to one using something like this:

```
PUT ipld://{CID}/ Headers {Content-Type="application/vnd.ipld.dag-json"} Body="{}"

echo "{}" | ipld-cli put ipld://{CID}/ --content-type="application/vnd.ipld.dag-json"

Or

GET ipld://{CID}/{Path} {Accept="application/vnd.ipld.dag-json} => Data

ipld-cli get ipld://{CID}/{Path} --accept="application/vnd.ipld.dag-json" > myfile.json
```

## Special Characters and Escaping

IPLD path segments can contain arbitrary bytes which can clash with how URLs decode and encode data.
Specifically, segments that contain non-ascii bytes or "unsafe" characters such as `[ ] { } | \ ” % ~ # < > /` must escape them using `%` octet encoding according to [rfc1738](http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1738.html) section 2.2.
Notably, the characters `$-_.+!*'(),` are "safe" and will not be reserved by the IPLD URL specification.
IPLD URL parsers must parse the segments and un-escape any octets into either raw bytes or unicode strings.

For example, the following IPLD tree has segments which contain characters which can have special meanings in URLs or are incompatible with ASCII environments.

```json
{
  "/": {
    "[hello world?]": {
      "😉": true
    }
  }
}
```

One could attempt to encode this naively as the following:

`///[hello world?]/😉/`

However this can result in conflits with different envrironemtns that would display the URL and would lose some information in the case of the `///` segment at the beginning.

As such, one should instead create a path that encodes individual segments as such:

`%2F/%5Bhello%20world%3F%5D/%uD83D%uDE09/`

Which will be parsed into the following list of segments which will be used for regular IPLD traversal:

```json
[
  "/",
  "[hello world?]",
  "😉"
]
```

## Lense Signaling

IPLD contains several ways of changing how data can be viewed via "lenses" such as Schemas and ADLs.

The characters `[` and `]` in path segments are reserved for a future Lense Signaling function in order to apply these lenses.
For the initial version of IPLD URLs, all characters between an unescaped `[` and `]` will be removed from the segment during traversal.
e.g. `/[foobar]example/[baz=fizz]path/` will be equivalent to just `/example/path/`.

In the future, data within `[ ]` sections will be encoded in a similar fashion to the `searchpart` of HTTP URLs as defined in [rfc1738 3.3](http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1738.html).
e.g. we might signal ADLs and Schemes using syntax like the following: `ipld://bafyfoobar/[ADL=FBT]example/[schema=something&slelector=whatever]path/here/`

Note that escaping `[` or `]` with `%5B` or `%5D` can circumvent the lense signaling parsing and will be treated as a literal character within the path segment.
Similarly, having a `[` without a closing `]` will treat it as a literal rather than trying to parse a lense signaling section.

There should be only one lense signaling section within a path segment either at the beginning or the end.
However if there is both one at the beginning and the end, the first one must be used by the IPLD URL resolver.

This will be more strictly defined in a followup document.

## Initial Implementations TODOs:

- Formalize the spec for IPLD URLs using an IPLD Schema and some stubs for testing
- Add a IPLD-URL package to [go-ipld-prime/linking/](https://github.com/ipld/go-ipld-prime/tree/master/linking)
- Support resolving / traversal via IPLD URLs in [go-ipld-prime/traversal](https://github.com/ipld/go-ipld-prime/tree/master/traversal)
- Get an in intial implementation somewhere more experimental (e.g. the IPLD Protocol Handlers in the Agregore Browser)
- PR to IPFS gateway / CLI

## Future work:

- Lenses: ADLs/Schemas/Selectors via the Lense Signaling in path segments.
- `PATCH` support, pending on the spec stabilizing and getting implemented in [#195](https://github.com/ipld/go-ipld-prime/pull/350).
